#Getting and Cleaning Data Course Project
##by <a href="https://github.com/victoriaehall">Victoria Hall</a>

This ReadMe file describes the R script, data, and CodeBook created for the 
course project of the Getting and Cleaning Data course run by Johns 
Hopkins University and Coursera.

This project uses data from the <a href="http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones">Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Data Set</a>
(original information about these data can be found by clicking the link)

The original dataset includes the following files (as described by the authors
of the Human Activity Recognition Data Set):

- 'README.txt'
- 'features_info.txt': Shows information about the variables used on the feature vector.
- 'features.txt': List of all features.
- 'activity_labels.txt': Links the class labels with their activity name.
- 'train/X_train.txt': Training set.
- 'train/y_train.txt': Training labels.
- 'test/X_test.txt': Test set.
- 'test/y_test.txt': Test labels.
- 'train/subject_train.txt': Each row identifies the subject who performed the activity for each window sample. Its range is from 1 to 30. 
- 'test/subject_train.txt': Each row identifies the subject who performed the activity for each window sample. Its range is from 1 to 30. 

These files were generated for the Getting and Cleaning Data Course Project:

- 'README.md'
- 'run_analysis.R': this R script merges and cleans the X_train.txt & X_test.txt data sets
outlined above. It generates a tidy dataset of the average means and standard deviations for
each measure collected for each subject (n=30) and each activity (n=6)
- 'CodeBook.md': this code book outlines the remaining variables in the final tidy data set
as generated by the run_analysis R script
- 'tidy.txt': final tidy data set as generated by the run_analysis R script

The run_analysis R script is separated into six (6) sections that transition from
the raw data as downloaded from the Human Activity Recognition website to the
final tidy data set, saved as 'tidy.txt'.

#Section 1: lines 10-40
**Section objective:** merge the training and the test sets to create one data set

The code within this section:

1. Reads into R three (3) train data files (X_train.txt, y_train.txt, subject_train.txt)
as dataframes and three (3) test data files (X_test.txt, y_test.txt, subject_test.txt)
2. Renames the variables names of the train and test subject and activity dataframes.
3. Combines all three train and all three test dataframes, in this order: subject, activity, train data. This generates two dataframes: train & test
4. Combines the train and test dataframes into one (1) dataframe called 'data'

#Section 2: lines 42-59
**Section objective:** extracts the mean and standard deviation for each measurement

The code within this section:

1. Reads the features $ activity data files into R. These are used for the for variable and value names.
2. Cycle through the features dataframe to find the variable numbers for all 
mean and standard deviation variables. These will be used to extract the correct
variable from the data 'dataframe'. Because we added two new variables to the
front of the data 'dataframe', we add 2 to the column number as we pull the 
mean and standard deviation column numbers
3. Subset the 'data' dataframe using the column numbers generated in step 2. This
new dataframe is called 'extract'

#Section 3: lines 61-66
**Section objective:** Add descriptive activity names to the data set

The code in this section:

1. Adds value names to the activity column in the extract dataframe based on the 
labels outlined in the original 'activity.txt' dataframe

#Section 4: lines 68-78
**Section objective:** Add appropriate variable labels to the extract dataframe

The code in this section:

1. Convert V2 in the features dataframe to a character variable in order to 
extract the variable names to our working data set
2. For all variables except 'subject' and 'activity', create a character vector 
of the variable names that align with the mean and standard deviation 
variables that we selected in Section 2, Step 2
3. Add these variables names to the extract dataframe

#Section 5: lines 80-89
**Section objective:** creates a new, independent tidy data set with 
the average of each variable for each activity and each subject

The code in this section:

1. Melts the measurement variables in the extract dataframe, so that there are 
four (4) variables: subject, activity, variable, measurement
2. Summarizes the melted extract dataframe so that each measurement variable
is averaged by subject and by activity
3. This summarized data is saved in a new dataframe called 'tidy'


#Section 6: lines 91-94
**Section objective:** saves the tidy dataset as a text file

The code in this section:

1. Saves the new tidy dataframe as a text file called 'tidy.txt'

